I

CORRESPONDENCE WITH WATSON & CASSOUL, NANTES, FRANCE, AUGUST, 1782.


The earliest letter of General GEORGE WASHINGTON of Masonic Import known
is the one written while in camp at Newburgh in New York, dated State of
New York, August 10, 1782, to the firm of Watson and Cassoul in Nantes,
France, in which his friend, Brother Elkanah Watson was the chief
partner, thanking the firm for the Masonic Apron and ornaments sent him
from Nantes, France.

This apron is now in the possession of the Alexandria-Washington Lodge,
No. 22, at Alexandria, Virginia.

Elkanah Watson in his Memoirs states:[13]

     "Wishing to pay some mark of respect to our beloved Washington, I
     employed, in conjunction with my friend M. Cossoul, nuns in one of
     the convents at Nantes to prepare some elegant Masonic ornaments,
     and gave them a plan for combining the American and French Flags on
     the apron designed for this use. They were executed in a superior
     and expensive style. We transmitted them to America, accompanied by
     an appropriate address."


By the above extract is shown beyond all doubt the error in the
statement so repeatedly made, that the apron at Alexandria is the one
made by the Marquise de Lafayette, and presented to WASHINGTON by
General Lafayette, during his visit to Mount Vernon in 1784, and the one
in the Museum of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, that of Watson and
Cassoul.[14]

Following letter was sent to WASHINGTON, together with the Masonic Apron
and "Ornaments," by Messrs. Watson and Cassoul, from France under date
"east of Nantes," 23d 1st Month, 5782.[15]

     "TO HIS EXCELLENCY, GENERAL WASHINGTON, AMERICA.

     "_Most Illustrious and Respected Brother:_

     "In the moment when all Europe admire and feel the effects of your
     glorious efforts in support of American liberty, we hasten to offer
     for your acceptance a small pledge of our homage. Zealous lovers of
     liberty and its institutions, we have experienced the most refined
     joy in seeing our chief and brother stand forth in its defence, and
     in defence of a newborn nation of Republicans.

     "Your glorious career will not be confined to the protection of
     American liberty, but its ultimate effect will extend to the whole
     human family, since Providence has evidently selected you as an
     instrument in his hands, to fulfill his eternal decrees.

     "It is to you, therefore, the glorious orb of America, we presume
     to offer Masonic ornaments, as an emblem of your virtues. May the
     Grand Architect of the Universe be the Guardian of your precious
     days, for the glory of the Western Hemisphere and the entire
     universe. Such are the vows of those who have the favor to be by
     all the known numbers."

        "Your affectionate brothers,
          "WATSON & CASSOUL."

     "East of Nantes, 23d 1st Month, 5782."


=WASHINGTON'S HEADQUARTERS

NEWBURGH-ON-THE-HUDSON WHERE THE WATSON AND CASSOUL LETTER WAS WRITTEN,
AUGUST, 1782.=


Owing to the uncertain intercourse between the two countries, it was
almost seven months before Brother WASHINGTON received the Masonic
apron, ornaments and letter from France. He at that time was in camp
with the army at Newburg on the Hudson.[16]

In reply WASHINGTON sent the following autograph letter to the donors in
Nantes, viz.:

     "STATE OF NEW YORK
     "Augt 10th 1782.

     "Gentn.

     "The Masonick Ornamts
     "which accompanied your Bro-
     "therly Address of the 23d of
     "Jany last, tho' elegant in
     "themselves, were rendered
     "more valuable by the flattering
     "sentiments, and affectionate
     "manner, in which they were
     "presented.--

     "If my endeavours to
     "avert the evil, with which this
     "Country was threatned by a
     "deliberate plan of Tyranny,
     "should be crowned with the suc
     "cess that is wished--The praise
     "is due to the _Grand Architect_
     "of the Universe; who did not see
     "fit to suffer his superstructures
     "and justice, to be subjected to the
     "Ambition of the Princes of this
     "World, or to the rod of oppression,
     "in the hands of any power upon
     "Earth.--

     "For your affectionate
     "Vows, permit me to be grateful;
     "--and offer mine for true Brothers
     "in all parts of the world; and
     "to assure you of the sincerity
     "with which I am

        "Yrs
          "Go. Washington"

     "Messrs
       "Watson & Cosson[17]
         "East of Nantes"


This autograph letter from WASHINGTON to Messrs. Watson and Cassoul is
now in the possession of the Grand Lodge of New York, who purchased it
from a member of the Watson family in the year 1866 or 1867 at a cost of
approximately $1,000, and is now framed and secured between two sheets
of glass in the collection of the Committee of Antiquities of the Grand
Lodge F. & A. M. of New York.[18]

It is written upon two pages of an ordinary letter sheet, and was a copy
of one written by WASHINGTON, with which he was not entirely satisfied,
as shown by the changes made in the text before it was sent to France.
The first copy WASHINGTON retained, and is now in the Library of
Congress, and is here given for comparison, viz:

     "STATE OF NEW YORK,
     "Augt 10th 1782.

     "_Gentn._,

     "The Masonick Orna-
     "ments which accompanied your
     "Brotherly Address of the 23d.
     "of the first month, tho' elegant
     "in themselves, were rendered
     "more valuable by the flattering
     "sentiments, and affectionate
     "manner, in which they were
     "offered.--

     "If my endeavours to
     "avert the evil, with which
     "this Country was threatned, by
     "a deliberate plan of Tyranny,
     "should be crowned with the
     "success that is wished--the
     "praise is due to the _Grand
     "Architect_ of the Universe; who
             see fit to
     "who did not ^ suffer his superstruc
     "tures & justice, to be subjected
       ambition of the Princes of this world--or
     "to the ^ rod of oppression, in the
     "hands of any power upon Earth.

     "For your affectionate
     "vows, permit me to be grateful;
     "and offer mine for true Brothers
     "in all parts of the world; and
     "to assure you of the sincerity
     "with which I am,

        "Yrs.
          "Go. Washington"

     Endorsed
       to
     "Messrs. Watson &
     "Cosson--Nantes
       "10th Augt 1782."


=FAC-SIMILE OF THE ORIGINAL DRAFT OF WASHINGTON'S LETTER TO WATSON AND
CASSOUL, NEW YORK, AUGUST 10, 1782.=


A photographic fac-simile of the letter now in New York, and a photostat
of the original copy retained by WASHINGTON are in the collection of the
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

The firm of Watson and Cassoul of Nantes, France, acted as confidential
agents of the American Government during the Revolutionary period, as is
shown by their correspondence with Benjamin Franklin in the Franklin
Mss. collection of the American Philosophical Society.[19] Elkanah
Watson was also a bearer of despatches to Dr. Franklin.




Footnotes:

[13] "Men and Times of the Revolution, or Memoirs of Elkanah Watson,"
New York, 1856, pp. 135, 136.

[14] Cf. "Proceedings Grand Lodge of New York," 1867, p. 28.

[15] "Memoirs of Elkanah Watson," p. 135.

[16] Cf. "Itinerary of General WASHINGTON from June 15, 1775, to
December 23, 1783," by William S. Baker, Philadelphia, 1892, p. 271.

[17] It will be noted that on both the draft and letter, WASHINGTON
spells the name Cassoul--"Cosson."

[18] Catalogue of Antiquities and Curios, Grand Lodge F. & A. M., New
York, Class J, No. 1, New York, 1905.

[19] Cf. "Calendar of the Papers of Benjamin Franklin in the Library of
the American Philosophical Society," edited by I. Minis Hays, Volume V,
p. 312.
