X

CORRESPONDENCE WITH GRAND LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS, DECEMBER, 1792.


     "At Grand Lodge held at Concert Hall, Boston, 10th of December, 5792,
     being a Quarterly Communication it was

     "_Resolved_, That the Grand Master, with the Grand Wardens, present
     to our Most Beloved Brother

                         GEORGE WASHINGTON,

     the new Book of Constitutions, with a suitable address."


At the next Quarterly Communication we find that,

     "Agreeably to a resolve at the last Quarterly Communication, the
     Grand Master, with his Wardens, reported:

     "That they had written to our beloved President and Brother, George
     Washington, and presented him with a Book of Constitutions, to
     which letter he had been pleased to make answer. The letter and
     answer were read, and Voted to be inserted in the records of the
     Grand Lodge."


This address was evidently sent to President WASHINGTON at Philadelphia,
and was answered from the presidential office in that city. No date nor
place appears upon either the original so far as known, nor the copy in
the letter book, both address and reply therein being in the handwriting
of Bartholomew Dandridge, Secretary to the President.

The following copy of both address and reply are taken from Letter Book
II, folio 106-108.

     "An Address of the Grand Lodge of Free &
     "Accepted Masons for the Commonwealth
     "of Massachusetts, To their honored and
     "Illustrious Brother.

                GEORGE WASHINGTON.

     "Whilst the Historian is describing the
     "career of your glory, and the inhabitants
     "of an extensive Empire are made happy
     "in your unexampled exertions:--whilst some
     "celebrate the Hero so distinguished in li-
     "berating United America; and others the Patriot
     "who presides over her Councils, a Band of bro-
     "thers, having always joined the acclamations
     "of their countrymen, now testify their res-
     "pect for those milder virtues which have
     "ever graced the man.

     "Taught by the precepts of our Society;
     "that all its members _stand upon a level_, we
     "venture to assume this station & to approach
     "you with that freedom which diminishes
     "our diffidence without lessening our respect.

     "Desirous to enlarge the boundaries of
     "social happiness, and to vindicate the cere-
     "monies of their institution, this Grand Lodge
     "have published a "Book of Constitutions," (and
     "a copy for your acceptance accompanies
     "this) which by discovering the principles that
     "actuate will speak the Eulogy of the Society;
     "though they fervently wish the conduct of its;
     "Members may prove its higher commendation.

     "Convinced of his attachment to its
     "cause, and readiness to encourage its bene-
     "volent designs; they have taken the liberty to
     "dedicate this work to one, the qualities of
     "whose heart and the actions of whose life
     "have contributed to improve personal virtue,
     "and extend throughout the world, the most endear-
     "ing cordialities; and they humbly hope he will
     "pardon this freedom, and accept the tribute of
     "their esteem & homage.

     "May the supreme architect of the uni-
     "verse protect & bless you, give you length of
     "days & increase of Felicity in this world, and then
     "receive you to the harmonious & exalted So-
     "ciety in Heaven.--

        "JOHN CUTLER,        _Grand Master_
        "JOSIAH BARTLETT  }
        "MUNGO MACHEY     }   _Grd Wardens_.

     "Boston
     "Decem. 27, A.D. 1792."


The following reply was sent by President WASHINGTON from Philadelphia
to the Brethren of the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts. It will be noticed
that there was no date or place mentioned upon the copy in the Letter
Book, nor on the original letter, which at present is believed to be in
the Library of the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts.

     WASHINGTON'S REPLY

     "TO THE GRAND LODGE OF FREE & ACCEPTED MA-
       "SONS, FOR THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHU-
       "SETTS.

     "Flattering as it may be to the human
     "mind, & truly honorable as it is to receive
     "from our fellow citizens testimonies of appro-
     "bation for exertions to promote the public wel-
     "fare, it is not less pleasing to know, that the
     "milder virtues of the heart are highly respected
     "by a Society whose liberal principles must be
     "founded in  the immutable laws of truth and
     "justice.--

     "To enlarge the sphere of social happi-
     "ness is worthy the benevolent design of a ma-
     "sonic institution; and it is most fervently to
     "be wished, that the conduct of every member
     "of the fraternity, as well as those publications
     "that discover the principles which actuate them;
     "may tend to convince mankind that the grand
     "object of Masonry is to promote the happiness
     "of the human race.

     "While I beg your acceptance of
     "my thanks for the "Book of Constitutions" which
     "you have sent me, & the honor you have done
     "me in the dedication, permit me to assure you
     "that I feel all those emotions of gratitude
     "which your affectionate address & cordial
     "wishes are calculated to inspire; and I
     "sincerely pray that the Great Architect
     "of the Universe may bless you here, and
     "receive you hereafter into his immortal Temple.

        "Go. Washington"


No fac-simile copy of the original letter was obtainable for the
Collection of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.


=WASHINGTON'S REPLY TO THE GRAND LODGE OF MASSACHUSETTS. LETTER BOOK II,
FOLIO 108.=