II

CORRESPONDENCE WITH ALEXANDRIA LODGE, NO. 39, VIRGINIA, DECEMBER, 1783.


The next Masonic Letter of Brother WASHINGTON of which we have any
knowledge is the one written in answer to a letter sent him, upon his
return to civil life by the Brethren of Lodge No. 39, on the register of
the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, which met at Alexandria, Virginia.

December 23, 1783, General WASHINGTON presented himself to "The United
States in Congress Assembled," at Annapolis, Maryland, and resigned his
Commission that he had received on June 17, 1775, as Commander-in-Chief
of the Armies of the United States.

Upon Christmas Eve he returned to Mount Vernon, whereupon the Brethren
at Alexandria, who, it must be remembered, were working under a
Pennsylvania Warrant, at once sent the following Address signed by the
Officers of Lodge No. 39, to Brother WASHINGTON at Mount Vernon,[20]
viz.:

     "_Sir_: Whilst all denominations of people bless the happy occasion
     of your excellency's return to enjoy private and domestic felicity,
     permit us, sir, the members of Lodge No. 39, lately established in
     Alexandria, to assure your excellency, that we, as a mystical body,
     rejoice in having a brother so near us, whose preeminent
     benevolence has secured the happiness of millions; and that we
     shall esteem ourselves highly honored at all times your excellency
     shall be pleased to join us in the needful business."

     "We have the honor to be, in the name and behalf of No. 39, your
     excellency's

     "Devoted friends and brothers,
        "ROBERT ADAM, M.
        "E. C. DICK, S. W.
        "J. ALLISON, J. W.
        "WM. RAMSAY, _Treas._"

     "His Excellency General Washington."


Two days later Brother WASHINGTON sent following reply,[21] viz.:

     "MOUNT VERNON 28th Decr. 1783.

     "_Gentlemen_:

     "With pleasing sensibility
     "I received your favor of the 26th, and
     "beg leave to offer you my sincere thanks
     "for the favorable sentiments with
     "which it abounds.--

     "I shall always feel pleasure
     "when it may be in my power to ren-
     "der service to Lodge Nº 39, and in
     "every act of brotherly kindness to the
     "Members of it; being with great truth.

        "Your affecte Brother
        "and Obedt Servant
          "Go. Washington"

     "Robt Adam Esqr Master,
       "& the Wardens & Treasr
         "of Lodge Nº 39."


No copy of either address nor reply of this correspondence has thus far
been found among the Washington papers in the Library of Congress, by
the present writer.

Brother Robert Adam, the Master of Alexandria Lodge, No. 39, was a Son
of the Rev. John Adam, D.D., and Janet Campbell, of Kelbride, Scotland,
was born May 4, 1731; he emigrated to America in 1753, and, after a
short residence at Annapolis, Md., established himself at a pleasant
country residence in Fairfax County, Virginia, about four miles from
Alexandria. He was a gentleman of refined taste, cultivation and wealth,
and interested himself in everything that could promote the prosperity
of his adopted home.


=WASHINGTON'S REPLY TO ALEXANDRIA LODGE, NO. 39. ORIGINAL IN
ALEXANDRIA-WASHINGTON LODGE, NO. 22, ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA.=


It appears that during his residence at Annapolis, he was made a Mason
in a clandestine or irregular Lodge, and in the year 1783 applied for a
dispensation from the Grand Master of Pennsylvania, to apply to Lodge
No. 2, for initiation and membership.

Brother Dr. Elisha Cullen Dick, Senior Warden of Lodge No. 39, was a
native of Pennsylvania, born near Marcus Hook, in Delaware County, about
1753, and died at Alexandria, Va., September 22, 1825. He was a son of
Archibald Dick, a member of Lodge No. 2 at Philadelphia, and joined the
same Lodge, September 15, 1779.[22] Brother Elisha C. Dick was a
graduate of the old Pequea Academy, and of the College of Pennsylvania.
He began the study of medicine under Drs. William Shippen and Benjamin
Rush. After graduating he settled in Alexandria, Va., and at once became
active in Masonic circles in that city, and was instrumental in having
the petition presented to the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania for a warrant,
which was granted under the name and number "Alexandria Lodge No. 39."

Upon the records of the Lodge, Brother Dick appears as both predecessor
and successor of Brother WASHINGTON as Master. Brother Dick was the
first consulting physician in WASHINGTON's last illness, and also
conducted the Masonic services at WASHINGTON's funeral on December 18,
1799. A biography of Dr. Dick is in the Library of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania.

Brother John Allison, the Junior Warden of Lodge No. 39, had served as
Major in the 1st Virginia State Regiment, and later as Lieutenant
Colonel.

Brother William Ramsay, Treasurer of Lodge No. 39, was an old personal
friend of WASHINGTON.

For a history of Alexandria Lodge, No. 39, warranted by the Grand Lodge
of Pennsylvania, February 3, 1783, which was constituted on the second
floor of a large three-story frame building, known as the "Lamb Tavern,"
on the twenty-fifth of February, 1783, the Masonic student is referred
to "Old Masonic Lodges of Pennsylvania," Philadelphia, 1913, Chapter
XLVI, pp. 153-168.

This tavern was situated on the west side of Union Street, between
Prince and Duke Streets, Alexandria, the site of which is now known as
No. 55 South Union Street.[23]



Footnotes:

[20] Cf. "Old Masonic Lodges of Pennsylvania--Moderns and Ancients,"
Julius F. Sachse, Philadelphia, 1913, Vol. II, p. 157. Also _Vide_
"Washington the Man and the Mason," by Charles H. Callahan, published
under the auspices of the "Memorial Temple Committee of the George
Washington Masonic National Memorial Association," Washington, D. C.,
1913.

[21] Original among Washington relics in Alexandria-Washington Lodge,
No. 22, Alexandria, Virginia. Fac-simile in Washington collection of
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

[22] Elisha C. Dick's petition was presented in Lodge No. 2, September
14, 1779, approved and entered by virtue of a dispensation from the
Grand Master, September 15; passed and raised, September 23.
"Freemasonry in Pennsylvania," Vol. I, pp. 352, 353.

[23] Cf. "The Lodge of Washington," by F. L. Brocket, Alexandria, Va.,
1876.