VII

CORRESPONDENCE WITH GRAND LODGE OF SOUTH CAROLINA, MAY, 1791.


President WASHINGTON left Georgetown at six o'clock in the evening, May
1, 1791, reaching Charleston, South Carolina, Monday, May 2, in a
twelve-oared barge rowed by twelve American captains of ships
accompanied by a great number of boats with gentlemen and ladies in
them, and two boats with music.[40] Brother WASHINGTON remained in
Charleston until May 9.

Wednesday, May 4, 1791, General Mordecai Gist, an old companion in arms
of WASHINGTON, and formerly Master of the Military Lodge in the Maryland
line (No. 27 upon the register of Pennsylvania),[41] but now Grand
Master of the Grand Lodge of Ancient York Masons of South Carolina,
attended by the other present and past grand officers,[42] waited on
their beloved brother, the president of the United States, and presented
the following address:[43]

     "_Sir_--Induced by a respect for your public and private character,
     as well as the relation in which you stand with the brethren of
     this society, we the Grand Lodge of the State of South Carolina,
     Ancient York Masons, beg leave to offer our sincere congratulations
     on your arrival in this state.

     "We felicitate you on the establishment and exercise of a permanent
     government, whose foundation was laid under your auspices by
     military achievements, upon which have been progressively reared
     the pillars of the free republic over which you preside, supported
     by wisdom, strength, and beauty unrivalled among the nations of the
     world.

     "The fabric thus raised and committed to your superintendence, we
     earnestly wish may continue to produce order and harmony to
     succeeding ages, and be the asylum of virtue to the oppressed of
     all parts of the universe.

     "When we contemplate the distresses of war, the instances of
     humanity displayed by the Craft afford some relief to the feeling
     mind; and it gives us the most pleasing sensation to recollect,
     that amidst the difficulties attendant on your late military
     stations, you still associated with, and patronized the Ancient
     Fraternity.

     "Distinguished always by your virtues, more than the exalted
     stations in which you have moved, we exult in the opportunity you
     now give us of hailing you brother of our Order, and trust from
     your knowledge of our institution, to merit your countenance and
     support.

     "With fervent zeal for your happiness, we pray that a life so dear
     to the bosom of this society, and to society in general, may be
     long, very long preserved; and when you leave the temporal symbolic
     lodges of this world, may you be received into the celestial lodge
     of light and perfection, where the Grand Master Architect of the
     Universe presides.

     "Done in behalf of the Grand Lodge.

        "M. GIST, G. M."[44]

     "Charleston, 2d May, 1791."


To this address WASHINGTON returned the following reply.[45]

     "_Gentlemen_:--I am much obliged by the respect which you are so
     good as to declare for my public and private character. I recognize
     with pleasure my relation to the brethren of your Society, and I
     accept with gratitude your congratulations on my arrival in South
     Carolina.

     "Your sentiments, on the establishment and exercise of our equal
     government, are worthy of an association, whose principles lead to
     purity of morals, and are beneficial of action.

     "The fabric of our freedom is placed on the enduring basis of
     public virtue, and will, I fondly hope, long continue to protect
     the prosperity of the architects who raised it. I shall be happy,
     on every occasion, to evince my regard for the Fraternity. For your
     prosperity individually, I offer my best wishes."

        "Go. Washington"


This letter was probably destroyed with other Grand Lodge property when
Columbia, South Carolina, was burned by Sherman's Army during the war
between the States.[46]

Fortunately, the original draft of WASHINGTON's reply, was found among
the Washington papers now in the Library of Congress. This is written
upon two pages of a letter sheet: the first page shows a paragraph which
was suppressed and did not appear upon the clear copy sent to the Grand
Lodge of Ancient York Masons of South Carolina.

A photostat of this draft is in the collection of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania, viz.:

     "TO THE GRAND LODGE OF THE STATE OF SOUTH
       "CAROLINA ANCIENT YORK MASONS.

     "_Gentlemen_,

     "I am much obliged by the respect
     "which you are so good as to declare for my
     "public and private character. I recognise
     "with pleasure my relation to the Brethren
     "of your Society--and I accept with gratitude
     "your congratulations on my arrival in
     "South Carolina.

     "_Your felicitations It is peculiarly
                           general
     "pleasing to observe the ^ satisfaction expressed
     "on the establishment and exercise of the
     "federal government_--
     "Your sentiments on the establishment
     "and exercise of our equal government are
     "worthy of an association, whose principles
     "lead to purity of morals, and beneficence
     "of action--The fabric of our freedom
     "is placed on the enduring basis of
     "public virtue, and will long continue
     "to protect the Posterity of the architects
     "who raised it.

     "I shall be happy on every
                            regard
     "occasion to evince my respect for the
     "Fraternity, for whose happiness individually
     "I offer my best wishes.

        "Go. Washington"


=FAC-SIMILE OF DRAFT OF WASHINGTON'S REPLY TO ADDRESS FROM GRAND LODGE OF
SOUTH CAROLINA, MAY, 1791.

HANDWRITING OF MAYOR WILLIAM JACKSON.=


Upon the first page the four lines commencing with "Your felicitations"
and ending with "federal government" were crossed out, and as above
stated, were not in the reply sent to R. W. Grand Master Gist and his
officers.

In the third line from the bottom the word "regard" is substituted for
"respect."

Brother Gist was the original Warrant Master of the Regimental Lodge in
the Maryland line, No. 27, on the Roster of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania. After the war, Brother Gist settled in Charleston, South
Carolina, retaining his old Military Warrant, and, in 1786, applied to
the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, to renew this warrant, for a Lodge to
be located at Charleston under the same number. This request was
granted, and Brother Gist was again named as Warrant Master.

At the formation of the Grand Lodge of South Carolina Ancient York
Masons in 1787, Brother Gist was elected Deputy Grand Master and served
as such during the years 1787-88-89, and as Grand Master, 1790-1791.



Footnotes:

[40] Washington's Diary.

[41] Cf. "Old Masonic Lodges in Pennsylvania," Philadelphia, 1913, Vol.
2, p. 53 _et seq._

[42] Brother William Drayton, Past Grand Master; Brother Mordecai Gist,
Grand Master; Brother Thomas B. Bowen, Deputy Grand Master; Brother
George Miller, Senior Grand Warden; Brother John Mitchell, Junior Grand
Warden; Brother Thomas Gates, Grand Chaplain; Brother Robert Knox, Grand
Treasurer; Brother Alexandrer Alexander, Grand Secretary; Brother Israel
Meyers, Grand Tiler.

[43] _City Gazette_, Friday, May 6, 1791, p. 2, column 4.

[44] For full account of Lodge 27 and Brother Gist, _vide_ "Old Masonic
Lodges of Pennsylvania," before quoted, Vol. II, pp. 53-63.

[45] Cf. Hayden, "Washington and his Masonic Compeers," p. 135.

[46] William C. Mazyck, Right Worshipful Grand Secretary, G. L. of South
Carolina.